Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lobsson. Today
I'm joined by Laura Carroll. She's a nonfiction author,
expert on the child-free choice and pro-natalism, and an
advocate for reproductive rights and ethics related to reproduction
as well. She's the author of The Baby Matrix
Why Freing Our Minds from Outmoded Thinking about Parenthood.
And reproduction will create a better world. And today
we're talking about mostly about child-free choices and prenatalism.
So Laura, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to everyone.
Thanks for having me on.
OK, so let's start with the basic question here.
So what is it to be child-free? What does
it mean?
Well, you know, that word was termed in a
textbook going as far back into the 70s, and
um really, it still means what it meant then
is it's a, a, that a person who does
not want to parent, they don't want to have
children, you know, it's the desire not to To
have children. So, and it is the word child-free
with no hyphen, no child space-free online, you see
all kinds of things now where in, and it's
a muddled definition uh of different versions of the
word depending on the article that you read, but
that's the way um I, I term it and
how I use it, and that's, you know, historically,
that's how it's been used and spelled.
Uh, WOULD it be any problem at all if
it have a hyphen, or, I mean,
well, if it has a hyphen, sometimes it does
mean the same. It's synonymous, but in other pieces
and other. Articles I read, it could mean that
it's a person who just doesn't have children right
now. Uh, IT, it, it could mean whatever the
article is about. So it gets confusing. So, and
you also see it with a space in between,
which can also mean parents who currently aren't with
their kids. So I just like to say, put
it all together, and that's the word that consistently
means it's people who really choose not to have
children.
OK, so let's address right away one question that
probably people will not be very fond of this
conversation will want to ask. So does it have
anything to do with being anti-children?
You know, no, it really doesn't. Um, I think
that, um, I mean, it can, where there are,
I would maybe recharacterize it a little, there are
some child-free people who would say that, you know,
children in general are not their favorite thing. Now,
it's not that they hate them, but, um, you
know, they just, it's not their favorite thing, and
they don't want to raise them. So it's, it's
not that they're anti-children. Some of them have jobs
that involve children, you know, so, There's a small
percentage who would say that they dislike them, but
that's certainly not the majority. And I think this
anti-children messaging we hear a lot more of, of
late. HAS to do more with antenatalists and antenatalism,
which is a whole other philosophy where you can
be, you could be, um, you know, it's a,
it's more of a philosophy that is, um, of
people who believe it's not, uh, they don't like
to see children come into the world, babies to
come into the world because of the suffering that
they will incur, and they didn't choose that. So
someone who holds that philosophy could be someone who
is child-free, but not necessarily. Let me tell you,
there's a lot of child-free people who don't even
know what that word means, let alone the philosophy.
So I would say that, uh, no, uh, does
it have anything to do with being anti-children? Generally
speaking, absolutely not.
And let me just add, because I've spoken with
antenatalists on the show, antenatalism also does not have
anything necessarily to do with being anti-children. It's
just that not necessarily, no.
Yeah, because there are many antenatalists that say that
we should take care of children who are already
born,
who are already here. Exactly right. Yes, it's just
that the word anti-children, just because we don't want
to raise them doesn't mean we're anti them or
that we hate them. It's just that we don't
want to raise them. So that's a distinction.
Yeah, uh, so is a child free choice something
that people try to impose on others?
I, in my 25 year plus experience, I've not
seen that there's no, um, I don't know, they
don't try to impose it on others. They don't
necessarily advocate it either. I think what I've seen
more in just the two generations, the digital revolution
that I've witnessed since the year 2000 that, uh,
That online has allowed more people to become educated
about the choice, more people to be aware of
it, and the people who, who make the choice.
In my, one of my first books, Families of
Two, which was interviews with happily married couples who
were child-free, um, before Google and all this time,
you know, they, they were people who felt like
they lived in the tributaries, you know, really of
society, and Fast forward 25 years, there's so much
now online to, to learn and to be aware
of and to see these people. They're just like,
you know, you and me, they're very normal people.
So it's not so much about advocacy advocacy or
um pushing it on others. It's more just to
say, here we are, and we're just like you,
we're normal people, and we've just made a choice
that's different than, than others.
So let me ask you, because sometimes, I mean,
I've heard this personally, but also sometimes I hear
and read people on the internet, people who are
child-free complaining about having to hear some, I mean,
I mean unpleasant things to say the least from
people who have. Children in regards to their choice
to not have children, I mean, where do you
think that this comes from and why do you
think that if someone, there are many people out
there that if they learn that someone is child
free, that they feel the need to moralize them
so much.
Well, I think I go into that, into the
baby matrix because it's a, it's, it's foundationally speaking,
it boils down to pro-natalism, and they're holding some
pro-natalist beliefs that, uh, makes it easy to judge
that choice. For example, a very common one is
that people might see others who are child-free, that
they're selfish because they don't want to raise kids.
They don't want to have parenthood be the central
focus of their life. So somehow that makes them
a selfish person. Um, AND other things, is there's
something wrong with people who don't want to have
kids. So, but because they hold the belief that
normal people want them, and, you know, to do
the most selfless thing to do is to have
a child, those beliefs, when they see people doing
the opposite, it's easy to judge them, but the
foundational element of it is, uh, pro-natalism, which I'm
sure we'll talk more about.
Mhm. Yeah, so let's address another elephant in the
room because this is something that I also hear
a lot from pro-Natalist people. They say that most
people without children, child-free people, are childless, not. Exactly
by choice but by circumstance and then they get
into some pseudo critiques of feminism like saying that
oh it is because for example this is just
one thing that they say they say others as
well. Uh, IT is, for example, uh, because women,
uh, want to have a career and they want
to study, they go, they want to go to
higher education, and then they postpone, they postpone, they
postpone having children, and then they arrive at their
40s or late 30s. And and then they say,
oh my God, I can no longer have children.
I'm no longer in a proper state to have
children or something like that, but they regret the
choice. That's what they mean by that, that they,
they would, they in fact wanted to have children,
but they regret not having children and they are
just childless by circumstance. I mean, do we have
good data on that? And if so, what does
the data tell us?
We really don't have good data on that specifically.
Now, while that could be, uh, a woman's story,
it's very logical, it's feasible, but, uh, it's very,
in my opinion, the most people who end up
without children, uh, they, it's, it, it's very hard
to generalize. And so it, it's it, for most
women, it's a story that evolves over time. Now,
for some, it could be that, that they end
up when early in their lives, they have, they
think they want them, they have a career, their
life goes on, and many end up realizing they
don't want them. They end up having a, making
a child-free choice. So over time, Their feelings shift,
or it could be the opposite, or it could
be some mix of it in between when they're
in their 20s, 30s, and 40s. So, it's, Every
woman has their own story, and uh I looked
into that when I did a longitudinal study with
uh 25 women who, they were in their twenties
when we started and they were decidedly child-free, and
I watched them for 10 years, and I interviewed
them once a year for 10 years and watched
how their lives unfolded, how their feelings about their
child-free choice remained the same, or sometimes they had
shifts. Insureness about that. And then at the end
of the 10 years, the story ends with, well,
do they still have kids? Did they not? And
there was a variety of stories. So I think
it's really hard to just say this is the
one thing that happens and that women, you know,
they regret it. There, that can happen, but there's
a whole host of other stories, how women navigate
um their reproductive choice and whether they have children
of their own, they adopt or not.
Right, I mean, but we shouldn't assume unless there's
good data to support that, that people who are
child-free are just childless by circumstance and that they
regret that
decision. See, to me, definitively, if you're child free,
you don't feel regret. So if you're childless by
circumstance, that might, uh, that more indicates that, yes,
gee, I really wanted them, but I, for, for
reasons, I don't have them. A child-free person would
say, I'm in my 40s, 50s, and I can
no longer have kids. Whoopee. I'm happy about that.
I don't want them. And like I say, many
women's journeys, they end up, they begin thinking they
want them, but over time, they realize for a
whole host of reasons that uh they feel their
life is going to be more fulfilling without that
parental role. That's a lot of what I see
when it's delayed. So now there is research to
to support the fact that women who know early
in life that they don't want to have kids
and they're very sure about that from a younger
age, they tend not to change their mind. Ever,
OK. They don't, and they don't get into that
regret space or this, or the evolution of the,
of the choice over time. It's, it's less so.
However, that percentage of people who know that early
in their life is, is small. That's a, that's
a minority, but there is some tracking there that
we see across some studies.
OK, and I mean this is something that I've
I've, I've also heard a lot from pro-natalists. Is
it true that people with children are happier on
average than people without children?
Oh, this one really gets me going. I've been
writing about this probably uh since I had my
Lov Child Free blog that I started in 2009,
cause there are these studies that come out that,
you know, people with children are happier, people without
children are happier, and then it, over time, there,
there's one way or another, there's, the jury is
out. Now, what isn't out is that most of
the studies have flaws in the sense that they
don't Um, they don't have samples that, um, dissect
out a person who's child-free, uh, a person who
wanted kids but didn't have them. That might be
a different correlation to happiness than a child-free person.
So, they don't have these different situational samples, um,
and they don't often, hardly ever, uh, operationally define
happiness. So, if we don't really know what it
is, how can we really say that it's so?
So, so, one thing that I like to say
is because the jury's out on most of these
studies, I can't think of one where I can
point to and go, now, that one was done
well, um, is that maybe the question isn't so
much this about whether kids make you, uh, fulfilled
and happy. Maybe it's something else. And it's not
just whether you have kids or not. I'd like
to see more focus on that. Yeah,
we wouldn't necessarily have to have more detailed data
and break down the data more to really know
what's the main factor at play there and not
simply assume that it's having children or not having
children.
And how do you operationally define happiness, and that
should be a realm of the research study too
of what's What's most important that equals, you know,
meaning in life for me, um, that, that's, that's
hard to get to in, uh, experimentation. Um, SO,
you know, quantitative data. So I just say that
it's one factor. It can be one factor, parenthood,
but, you know, in the end, it's more complicated
than that.
I mean, don't even get, yeah, I don't think,
don't even get me started on happiness. Yeah, because
they are so, so flawed. I have a conversation
with Doctor Owen Flanagan, a philosopher, because back in
2023 he released an edited book and edited with
a few of, uh, book edited with a few
other authors that's titled Against Happiness, and I mean
just to say in a quick sentence that happiness
studies are absolutely flawed because they don't even take
into account. Cultural diversity in terms of how people
understand happiness in their own cultural context.
So for sure, for sure,
you know, yeah,
and religious context too across countries globally, it's very
different, yeah,
yeah, and I mean one interesting thing is that
pro-natalists are always talking about these awful regret that
supposedly people would feel if they, uh, postpone having
children. And then eventually, eventually get to a point
in their lives that for some reason they can
no longer have them, but they never tell us
about another kind of thing that we now know
is true thanks to the work of sociologists like
the Israeli Arna Donev that people can also regret
having children.
That's right, and it's very taboo, which is why
until recently there's not a lot of talk about
that. Uh, THAT too points to pro-natalism. Why? Because
there's the belief in that behemoth set of pro-natalist
beliefs that we shouldn't feel regret. It should be
the best thing that ever happens to us. And
so if we, oh, if we don't feel totally
110% positive about it, what? Something's wrong with you.
Because that's the way it's supposed to be. So
in Orna, she does some great qualitative research to
get women to talk more about it, and it
has helped uh more women talk about it online,
but they're still, you know, they're like closed forums,
the ones that are that are most candid because
that taboo is still so powerful, unfortunately.
Yeah, right, and I mean, let's talk about a
little bit about biology here because um I mean
there might be some misunderstanding going around here in
terms of what we have evolved to want. Have
we really evolved to want children or and to
reproduce or simply to have sex?
Well, one thing that the research tells us and
scholars across we that have dug deeply into this
is there is no evidence to support there's anything
in our biology that creates the desire, like to
want children. There's biology involved in being pregnant at
the time of delivery, things happen. Uh, BUT the
biology that would create the desire to have them,
it's not there. So that too, just to think
that that desire is innate, that is a strong
pronatalist belief that we've been fed for centuries and
so, so long that we just tend to, most
people think it's true, when really, that is not.
Now, the urge to have sex. You could say
it's more innate because we do have that desire.
Yet at the same time, I want to leave
that to the experts because there's people out there
who are asexual. They don't have the desire to
want sex. So if it were innate, we'd all
want to be doing it a lot, you know.
So, and it does happen, but, you know, so.
Is it innate? It's a, that's a whole another,
another like question on both sides. But what I
do know is our biology, our capacities are such
that as humans, as Homo sapiens, it's given, it's
such that we, our, our cognitive and brain capacities
gives us the choice. To have them animals, they
just do what they do instinctually, and they, they
reproduce to have more, but we have the capacity
to go, wait a minute, do I wanna do
that? So that's where some of our biology comes
in, in my opinion. That's where to go.
Yeah, so let me just have a couple of
things and then you can comment on them to
that to the instinct to have sex or the
instinct to reproduce. I mean, I would buy more
the argument that we have an instinct to have
sex, OK, so at least from puberty on. Words
that at the very least we feel attracted a
lot to the opposite sex or the same sex,
I mean, whatever, but we, we have that impulse
from a certain point in our lives on to
at least feel attracted to someone and. Uh, OF
course, the details about whether we really have an
instinct to actually have sex, OK, that's more debatable
because there's a good reason why we also have
sex education in schools because that is not something
that people are born with that kind of knowledge
either. So, uh, I mean. But, but when it
comes to reproducing and uh having children, I mean,
I read a recent study that points to a
strong possibility that from uh very early on in
our revolution as Homo sapiens, we learned that sex
is connected to reproduction. But that's still a cultural
thing. I mean, you still have to teach people
that there's that connection. I mean, that connection does
not come installed in our sort of evolved software
that we are born with that knowledge either. So
I mean I would agree with you there. Yeah,
that's why sex education is so important so that
young people know if you do this, this might
happen, and here's how it happens. It's not just
the pleasure of the moment.
So yeah, so just to say that even if
uh Homo sapiens have known for even if it's
from the very beginning, from the very beginning of
our existence, that there's that that link between having
sex and Uh, children, uh, I mean that's still
cultural. It's not biological, it's something that people propagate
culturally from generation to generation, that kind of knowledge
is not something that a baby is born knowing.
And certainly you could, uh, argue too that that
evolution is still happening where we have now, we
have, uh, identity, uh, gender identity is evolving, which
then leads to what kind of partnering and evolving
sexual orientation. And the cultural, social lifestyles that are
as a result, and that too is, you know,
binary or not, asexual or not, romantic. So we're,
we're dissecting it out even further as we go
along as, as humans. So, but I think the
core of it though is back to, is the
desire to want children, that's not innate. That I'm
clear about. It's social and culturally, uh, been fed
to us for centuries such that we think it
is, we think it's hardware wired, but it's really
not. It's just old messaging that, uh, we think
is true. That's one reason I did the baby
nature is I want people to see through this,
to like, no, this is not true. So once
you know what the truth is, it can help
people make better decisions about reproduction. So that's, that's
largely what I was after.
OK, so just before we get in directly into
pro-natalism, even though we've already been talking about it
throughout our conversation, let me just ask you one
more question. I mean, this is something that I've,
uh, heard in the Birth Gap documentary by Stephen
J. Shaw, which is apparently making the rounds again
in some podcasts across the internet and elsewhere. I
mean, do people who reproduce really tend to want
large families? I mean, because one claim that he
makes, I'm going to paraphrase, I don't have the
exact citation here, the exact quote here, but one
claim that he makes is the hardest step for
people to take is to have the first child,
and once they have the first, the first child,
then they go on to have the 2nd, the
4th, the 4th, the 5th, and so on. I
mean, is there, there, is there really evidence to
support that?
Absolutely not. That, I mean, that's uh one of
just so many assertions that he makes in the
film that, uh, the website that uh a cadre
of us have developed called Birth Facts or Birthgapfacts.org
that we address that, uh, it's, this is, there's
no evidence to support that people desire a specific
number. Number of children. I mean, you could, we
could sit here and argue for a while about
why, why they want fewer. And it's, there's a
lot of practicality involved in that. I mean, who
can have 5 children? OK, that's maybe it's in
a, you know, different cultures. It's culturally, it's based
on cultural, social norms that You know, that's related
to the number of kids, so, uh, it's, it's
so not just the way it is. Look around
and uh that's not what people are doing and
that's not what they really want to do. That's
what he might want to see happen, but I
don't, there's no evidence to support those assertions.
And by the way, we also have to keep
in mind that uh for example, in poorer countries
where the birth rates are still at least higher
than they are in the, in most developed countries,
11 of the reasons why that happens is not
necessarily because people plan on having that high number
of children, it's, it's because it just happens. I
mean, it's. Just because people do not have access
to proper parent planning and sex education and contraception,
and they have sex, they have sex, and children
happen. I mean, it's not planned.
That's right, yeah, they have lack of access to
birth control or education about that, and, you know,
culturally, some of in there too, some of it
is. Using birth control during sex is culturally taboo
in some countries, so the, the women have to
face that and how to figure that out. Uh,
SO yes, it's, uh, it's, it's cultural in nature
and, uh, social, uh, driven often as well and
just access and education, yeah.
So we've been talking about pro-natalism, but, but what
is pro-natalism exactly and what are the kinds of
ideas that they put forth, the pro-NATOists.
Well, I would say that pronatalism, that word is
a set of beliefs, and it's big. It's, I
like to call it a behemoth because it's so
big, but it's a set of beliefs that all
have in common that they're pro-birth, they encourage reproduction,
and they exalt the role of parenthood. So, uh,
in the Baby Matrix, I go into 7 big
pro-natalist assumptions that have driven society for, for a
long time. So, there's just some their beliefs. And
so, I would say that saying the word, uh,
like, who is a pro-natalist? A pro-natalist is somebody
who believes some, all of those beliefs, you know,
to the, to the extent that you have, you
believe pro-natal beliefs. You're the same, you're a strong
pronali, or if you, you know, believe some of
them, not so strong. So, we're throwing the word
around pro naus these days that just because, you
know, I might, uh, uh, as a pro nali,
I might think that everybody should have 5 kids,
that makes me a pro natalist. Well, that just
means I have this one belief. That's related to
some other beliefs in the behemoth of prenatalism. So,
but some of the biggest foundational ones, I think,
um, just 3 that I talk about a lot.
One is, uh, what I call the destiny, pronatalist
destiny assumption in, in the baby matrix where we're
all destined to want to have children. We've discussed
that already and I, in, in the book, then
I dissect that and say, here's really what the
truth is. The second one I call the normality
assumption that somehow if you don't want kids or
you don't end up with them, there's something wrong
with you. You're, you know, you're not mature enough.
I mean, there's a litany of what could be
judged about what's wrong, what's not normal. And And
the third, that a big one that there's a
lot of other beliefs attached to it, that somehow
having kids equals true fulfillment in life. Like, if
you don't do it, you're not gonna have what
it really, really means, you know, in life. So,
So there are just, and there's not, they all
don't have to do with not having kids. It
relates to, uh, if you have an only child,
this is a pro-natalist belief, oh, if you only
have one kid, that kid's not gonna grow up
to be socially, you know, adjusted, uh, that biology
or having a bio biological child is best. Like,
as a woman, if I don't have my own
biological child, then I have to feel shame, something's
wrong with me. If IVF doesn't work, I should
feel shame. Something's wrong with me. If I don't
have, you know, a boy and a girl, I
have to keep going till I have a boy
and a girl, and that's what makes a family.
I mean, it's just It, it affects all of
us, this pro-natalism, um, set of beliefs that we
drag around for centuries, that, um, I have to
point out that it's not just about not having
kids or thinking kids are the, the be all
end all. It's all these other things that are
attached to people who do have kids and have
families. So it's, it's all of us, everywhere. It's
big.
OK, OK, wait a minute. I have to address
two of the things you said there. So you
said that one of the things they say is
that you should have more than one child because
if you only have one, they will grow up
socially unadjusted. Uh, uh,
YEAH, there, well, that has come from just like,
again, because It's a pronatus belief that you should
have a lot of kids, and so if you
only have one, there's gonna be social messaging around
that. Now, for a while, uh, there was research
supposedly that supported that, but when it was dissected
later by Different researchers, they debunked it, and it
was by a, a guy who, Stanley Hall, I
think his name was, and he was a guy
who came from a large family, and you, you
could tell by reading the research, all of his
stereotypes were in there. There was debunked so easily.
But by then, It was in the social stratosphere
that people believed that. Even to this day, I
can't tell you, I hear people, oh yeah, how
many kids do you have? Only 10, so are
you gonna, you know, is, is Sally gonna have
a sister? Are you gonna, you know, keep trying,
like, get it, give her a brother or sister.
It's so ingrained. So it's, uh, But the research
doesn't support that, really that they're not well adjusted,
that boils down to good parenting, but um the
stereotypes are there. They, they still are.
And I mean, the other thing is that you
say that they they sort of shame women who
have difficulty reproducing, yeah, I mean, why, there are
women out there who just are infertile. I mean,
right, and yes, and that points to something is
wrong with you and you should feel bad about
that. I mean, that's a prenatalist notion, yeah, that
you should feel shame, feel bad that you can't,
you can't do what a woman, a woman's supposed
to do, which is to have a child reproduce.
So, that too gets it a foundational, foundational pronatalist
belief that the role of a woman is to
become a mother, period, and stop.
OK, so are we getting now into that sort
of silly argument that one of the things that
defines a woman is the ability to reproduce? So
if you don't have that ability, you're no longer
a woman. Is that the argument?
Well, you're still a woman, but you're flawed, and
you should feel bad. And you should feel shame
about that. And that's also what drives the fertility
industry. It's big business, you know, what women will
go through to try to have their own kid
is amazing. But that's, you know, again, it's, it's
that social and cultural pressure that, that, uh, with
that belief that I'm supposed to be able to
do this, and if I can't, oh, you know,
meanwhile, women that get pregnant, they miscarry all the
time, you know, our bodies are, they're smart. When
it's not right, the body says, mm mm, and
then that we're supposed to hide that too, that
that's supposed to be wrong, and really, it's, it's,
it's really right biologically.
No, look, I, I, I was starting to laugh
because, because it came to my mind that the
pro-natalists who are religious and they say that, for
example, that God is against abortion, if they looked
into the numbers of embryos that get expelled by
the woman's body in the first few weeks, the.
Percentages, I guess that they would change their minds
about God being against abortion because it's just insane.
Those numbers are just insane.
You gotta be against abortion in the church because,
you know, pro-natalist dogma is you need more people.
We need to have more people having more babies,
so I have more people who are in my
religious structure so that my religion can, can keep
and grow its power. And that's been going on
for centuries.
So For sure, so, um, let's talk about this
idea that pro-Natalists are some of them at least,
now we're getting into more of the, er, um,
political and, er, political I would say mostly political
ramifications of pro-NATalism because some people take it a
step further and it's not just, oh I'm going
to spend my life advocating for. Pro-NATalism, no, I'm
going to try to politically impose pro-natalism based on
certain, uh, claims that they make, and one of
them has to do with this idea of that
we are headed toward population collapse. Uh, I mean,
what does population collapse mean and is there any
evidence to support that?
The evidence is that there's no collapse going on.
I mean, you just gotta go to population clock.org
and I mean, the last I looked at the
United States, it's like one net person is born
every 14, sometimes it's 16 seconds. I mean, we're,
new babies are coming into the world. I mean,
every so many seconds. So, and what is it?
Globally, I think the fertility rate for women is
like 2.3. Do the numbers. It's gonna keep growing.
So the population collapse is related to the pro-natalist
belief that we need to continue to grow the
population, and if we, and, and a, a growth-oriented
economy is the way we need to exist as
humans, which, why? Because it pretends that we need
more and more people. It depends on that growth.
So, to get people scared, they will, they will
say, oh my God, there's not enough of us,
we're gonna, we're gonna become extinct. You gotta, you
gotta get going, you gotta have some kids. It's
just another social device, as an early feminists called
it. It's like a social device that tries to
get us to believe we should be fearful somehow
and get us to act in a reproductive way
that, uh, that the some power structures would like
us to. So I think it's, again, I think
it's all propaganda. You just look at the numbers
and we're growing exponentially. If anything, it's the opposite,
where we have Earth overshoot, like we use up
the Earth's resources annually, sooner and sooner every year,
because there's more and more of us using more.
And now there are people who would argue, well,
we have to just, you know, lower our consumption.
Well, I want to see that, you know. How
are we gonna figure that out? And even if
we found high-tech ways to solve that, you know,
what I read and research that I've read is,
is just because the technology gets better on greening
up industry, etc. AND all these things we can
do, all that it ends up with that we
continue to keep consuming. It doesn't end up in
less consumption, it ends up in more consumption. So
more consumption, more people, If anything, it's overpopulation crisis,
not collapse. So that's my camp. That's my, my
spiel. I'm in the overpopulation. I'm concerned about it
camp.
Yeah, yeah, and I mean, where's the population collapse
if the world population will grow until it reaches
1011 billion? I mean, I mean, the numbers are.
Not precise, but it's around 10 or 11 billion
that people put the cap off, the cap on,
and then it will stabilize. Some people say maybe
it will go down a little bit, maybe not.
I don't know,
but we know what's going to happen. We could
have resource wars that could, you know, disseminate populations
in different parts of the world and nobody really
knows.
And and and then the thing is, what kind
of, I mean, what number would be enough for
these people to be satisfied? 40 billion, 50 billion,
100 billion, 500 billion, I mean, because after a
certain point, we're just completely destroying the planet.
That's right. Yet Pro-natalism is all about growth, more
people, more this, more, more, more, more growth-oriented economy,
and there are a lot of people that are
really concerned about it on how do we unravel
that and try to um demographically, um, figure out
how all of us can live here and how
many is that, and there's varying numbers, which I'm
sure you're aware of them. I've seen it as
low as 2 billion to, to create a sustainable
world economy that we takes enough resources. Sources for
us, but we don't destroy the planet as we're
going. Some say 34. It's a, it's, it's not
really decided, but one thing for sure is when
you think of sustainability and as an economy, it's
a heck of a lot less than 8 billion
and counting. So that I, that I will, I'll
buy into.
And I mean then there's also, we can also
talk about the benefits of having fewer people on
the planet that they never address because for example,
fewer people correlate with higher wages for the average
worker, fewer, fewer. Where people correlate with uh I
mean uh less housing crisis for example as well,
so and they never address that, never ever address
that they're always uh freaking out about the supposed
imminent collapse of Social Security, but they never. Address
those benefits.
That's right. That's what I would say is they're
all about the baby matrix. They all, you know,
I love the movie and that's why I called
the book that because they're, they're not, they're only
telling you what they want you to believe, and
it's not the truth. So, you know, you see
beyond it and once you do, you can't really
unsee it, so. Yeah, it's a, it's, it's a
scary, I think that too many people and grow,
grow, grow at all costs, the, the way we're
going, it's, um, it's a scary thing for those
of us who are already here and for people
who do bring children into the world, you know,
and they're gonna be here in these next generations
to come, and I, I really don't know what
they're gonna have to face if we keep on
this, on this road.
Yeah, yeah, the prospects are already very dire because
of climate change and all of that, even with
the population we have now, so even adding 2
or 3 more billion as we're going to inevitably
add to the world population, I mean, you know,
so, uh, but, but I mean, uh, just to
address shortly, uh, the social security thing. So the
aging populations need more babies?
I think the operative word there is need. I
don't think we need uh more babies. I think
what we instead need to do more is to
try to figure out how to manage the, the
demography, as it were, and, um, and that will
require, uh, getting off, you know, grow at all
costs. So, again, it's to try to shift the
focus to How do we care for everyone who's
here and, and get off the, the only, the
only idea that's there is to create new people,
to take care of the old people. That has
to be only one way to go and the
rate, again, the rate we're going on it, um,
it's, it's not a good ending. So we need
to look at other ways to Manage all of
us here and the economy. So, and I think
there are ways to do it. There are demographers
out there and experts that I am sure could
figure it out, but we don't have the will.
We've got governments that are pro-natalist in nature. They
are grow, grow, grow at all costs. They want
that. So this is a, uh, um, another way
to approach it that they're not behind yet.
Yeah, and I mean even in terms of social
security, another thing yet again that they never talk
about is that it's not an inevitability that Social
Security will collapse because er productivity can go up.
And then fewer people can sustain a growing aging,
uh, uh, aging population.
So, and I think a lot, there's a lot
of discussion too of looking at Social Security, what
its original intent was, what is it doing today?
How could it be amended beginning with, you know,
people that are younger that start paying into it.
How do we restructure it so that in the
end, it takes better care of all of us.
It, it, it needs to, it needs to grow
itself, uh, because it's been around now for a
long time and it's still operating under the same
premises that it was in the beginning and we're
in a different world now. So, uh, I think,
I hope to see some amendments and things that
change for the, for the better over time.
Yeah, I mean, because we have uh examples all
over the world from last century. The exa the
the US is a very good one where uh
Franklin Roosevelt basically created Social Security and the system
didn't collapse. I mean there were a bunch of
uh suddenly new people getting Social Security benefits and
the. The System didn't collapse and then after World
War II and I mean the decades after that
when people from the so-called silent generation retired, I
mean uh because uh productivity again kept kept going
up, there were a ton of new people getting
Social Security benefits and the system never collapsed.
Of course, of
course, there's the caveat that you wet the baby
boom. There's
that caveat, but you did have more people, yeah,
and in the beginning, people did not live as
long. There's a reason why it's set at 65,
and now people live a lot longer. So there
too, that's another argument for wait, let's look at
the, the reality right now and structure it so
it works better for everybody. Um, I think it's,
it's more than time.
Yeah, and then there's the other aspect they never
talk about, and this is perhaps a way of
calling the bluff of some of these pro-Natalists that
get that get involved in politics is that they
never ever mention the possibility of increasing the tax
for rich people,
right?
They
never
talk about that.
And there's also people who are, who studied this,
who are arguing if only we Raise the age
at which you can start taking Social Security, how
that would impact it very positively. I'm no expert
about that, but people are, oh my God, you
know, but if we started it earlier, uh, and
made that one change, it might also help the
future of the system, but all of this is
to say that we have to stop relying on
the only theory is we have to create more
humans to keep it going. But it's still dusty
old for people to get off of it because
that's, that's just the reality we've lived with for,
for a long generational time.
OK, so another thing that is sort of related
to this idea that we need more babies is
that er what about immigration? I mean, do these
people have something against the immigrants?
Well, I would have to say there again, it's,
it could be that some people might hold a
pro-natalist belief that, that's nationalistic in nature, where we
want to make a lot of babies, but we
only want a certain kind. I,
I, I've actually heard that argument, to be honest.
I've heard that. I've heard the argument that, oh,
OK, I, I, uh, the argument I've heard from
a pro-natalist is that, oh, OK, certain kinds of
immigrants are fine, but some other immigrants that, uh,
I mean, conveniently tend to breed tend to have
a browner. Uh, uh, uh, SKIN, uh, those are
not, yeah, those are not fine.
So, well, even there, is it, is it really
a pro-natalist or is it someone who has, uh,
racial biased views such that who do they think
is normal, right? So there's an intersection there, but
because there could be people who hold some strong
pro-natalist beliefs who Who are fine with immigrants coming
into the country, right? And hey, have babies here,
you know, we need more workers and to do
X, Y, and Z. So it's not so clear
cut that, you know, it's, it's pro-natalist is an
anti-immigrant. It's, it's again, it's very, it's more nuanced,
but If there is an anti-immigrant, um, stance, you
know, there, hey, Roosevelt, he did it policy-wise years
ago. What was it like? I forget, like in
the early 1900s, he, he was Afraid that they
were gonna, the whites were gonna be outnumbered, you
know. So he, he was kind of a eugenicist,
and he didn't want immigrants here. Uh, SO it's
not like it's a, a new way of thinking.
However, Generations ago, you know, in the times of
the Romans or Augustus, I would, I would maybe
theorize it would have been less so because you
had civilizations, and they were all trying to fight
to be the dominant situation. They weren't going like,
hey, you can't come over here. They were busy
building their own civilization. But today, that there's a
lot more factors involved, and, um, like I say,
there's a lot of people who hold pro-natalist views
who they want the immigrants to be here. But
then there are those who, you know, they want
a lot of babies, the new tech, you know,
tech bro, prenatalists, they make it sound like this
is like a new thing, like the prenatalists are
new, given this, wanting to have IVF screenings to
make the perfect white babies and, you know, all
that. The only difference is we have better technology
today. So to me, it comes around in Waves,
where this anti-immigrant thing coupled with pro-natalism. It's, uh,
yes, it's partly propaganda, but it's just something that
comes to, um, we got to put the spotlight
on it now and wait a year from now,
it'll be something else, Ricardo. So we'll be.
Yeah, I mean, just to be clear, the kind
of argument I was making is not that there's
necessarily a link between being pro-Natalist and being an
anti-immigrant. That link is not always there, but for
some people and for some very prominent people, it
is
right. And I would argue attaching to that, that
what we're not saying is that there is a
racial bias. There's racism involved there. And whether you
want to say that's, you know, pro-natalist in nature,
they're two, it's, it's two separate things, but they
can coexist, unfortunately, yeah,
as well as some other eugenicist takes like for
example, I've heard some pro-Natalist people, very prominent ones,
even people who have pro-Natalist movements and institutions, associations
and Stuff like that, uh, talking openly about things
like IQ, having kids with higher IQ and selecting
against certain kinds of psychological traits or, uh, in
favor of certain kinds of psychological traits, uh, uh,
and, and other kinds of diseases and things like
that,
right? Yep, I see it too. Yeah, there's definitely
more talk about it because the technology is, uh,
it's more there to, uh. Maybe be used, but
that's also an ethical, um, discussion too of how
much do you want to use it and to
design babies, how, how, how much do we want
to get into that, uh, so there'll be different
camps on that one too, for sure, pro-natalist and
not.
Yeah, so I have one last question slash topic
I would like to ask you about. So do
you think that, uh, pro-natalism represents or can represent
a threat to women's reproductive rights?
I think so. I think we've seen it through
different generations. Uh, CERTAINLY. Beliefs that back to the
belief that, you know, mother, uh, a woman's role
is, uh, as, as mother drives other, uh, beliefs
and policies from birth control access to making it
harder to, uh, positions on abortion. That's, you study
that over time and it's, it's a moving target.
It was not illegal in times past, but now
we're Back to where we're fighting about whether it's,
uh, the baby, you know, it's, it's a human
from the moment of conception. So, these, the, uh,
these core beliefs that we're, a woman's here to
be a mother, these little tentacles come. Out to
these other beliefs that then have policy ramifications depending
on where you are and who's leading the government
and what they believe. So I, I think the
answer is yes, and it's, it goes in cycles,
but it's very much related.
I mean, particularly when it comes to abortion and
even going beyond abortion because for example, now in
the US there are talks to uh limiting the
access to anti-conception medicine to women.
It's like the,
like the, like the pill and so on. I
mean basic things
and it's a lack of access to birth control.
That's, that's what's uh the main point of it
is they want to make it more difficult. To
get access to birth control, get access to, um,
a way to abort the child without any hospital,
uh, being necessary. They, uh, wanted to make, make
it hard to even go anywhere to get an
abortion. So, yes, I think what it points, points
directly back to what the leaders think about why
women are here. I,
I, I, I, I, I mean, and when I
mean, and I mean, uh, the, the anti-abortion, I
don't like to call them pro-life because I think
that's just propaganda. I call them the anti-abortion people,
uh, I, I mean, there are so much silly
silly arguments that they make because they ignore, uh,
sometimes they don't know. About it other times they
just straight out lie about, for example, anti-abortion uh
laws uh reducing the number of abortions. That's not
true. The countries where with uh where abortion is
legal actually see the number of abortions go down,
so it's the opposite and then, and then they
assume that just because. They ban abortion. Women, if
they really want, are not going to take steps
to do the abortion anyways, but in less, much
less safe circumstances. They still, they still have the
abortion. It's just that it's not in a safe
environment in a hospital, in a clinic, or something
like that,
right? That's right, yep, yep, that's very right on.
I agree with you.
Yeah. Yeah,
I, I, but the good, I think the good
news there too is, uh, more of us now
see through some of this propaganda, and yes, there
are people who believe it and also hold religious
positions that help support believing some of these things
you're talking about, but I do think that the
younger generations, they see through some of this stuff,
and they, they know what is true and what
isn't, so they're not as easily fooled by some
of these, this messaging that's just, you know, ridiculous.
Uh, I, I mean, let me just, uh, uh,
let me just say, and this might sound a
bit cynical, but I left a bit when in
early Jan in early 2025, I think it, it
was in January, uh, news came out in The
Guardian that uh once abortion got banned across different
states in the US, uh, the rate of young
people, both men and women, wanting to have uh
vasectomies, uh
and. Yeah, yeah, and women, women went up that
they wanted to get their tubes tied or some
kind of birth, permanent birth control, so it was
exactly the opposite effect that, that, that, that was
wanted. So. Yeah,
so, so you know, maybe you're so pro-natalist that
you're actually contributing to people being permanently child-free.
Yeah, so that, you know, the beliefs really, they
do, that they're held by people in power, um,
we see it, we've seen it in history, and
we see it now, that policy that can be
made, um, to make it harder for women to
have control over their reproductive lives, you know, policies
that instill incentivize having kids. You get tax breaks,
the more kids you have. See, I would, if
it were me and I were in power, I'd
do just the opposite. I would incentivize people to
take like a parenting course before they ever get
pregnant so they, they can help them decide whether
they're, they want to be in the first place
and if they do, how, what they need to
learn to be good parents and then, then and
only then would they get the incentivized, you know,
I mean, I, I mean this is one of
the reasons why I don't. Call them pro-life and
I say that's just propaganda because once the child
is out of the womb they don't care about
it at all. I mean where where are they
um being for maternity leave, paternity leave, and why
are people who are Republicans in the US, for
example, voting against free lunches in school for children
they don't. ABOUT children and, and where are they
proposing stronger laws against child labor in the US
because it's gone up in recent years. I mean,
they're not,
they're not doing that. And we have a society
where a woman who doesn't want the child can
just drop it off at a fire department house,
a firehouse. They, women can leave the hospital without
the baby. And not get any repercussions, the mother
or the father. So we allow People to have
kids, and then when the kid, the baby is
here, so often, we, we don't do right for
them. They end up in foster care, it's harder
to get adopted, the adoption system is very difficult,
so lots of negative impacts as a result of,
you know, these pro-natalist beliefs that we can, we
should be able to have as many kids as
we want when we want, um, that we pay
a lot of costs for that, so, and one
huge one is we have a lot of parents
who aren't ready to be parents. The kids are
the ones that suffer. Yeah, that really gets me
going too.
And that's the thing, because as we talked about
at the beginning, since most child-free people are not
trying to impose their beliefs on other people, contrary
to pro-Natalist people. I mean, child-free people are perfectly
OK if someone wants to have 10. Children, I
mean if you want to have 10 children, go
ahead and have 10 kids, whatever, do whatever you
want, right? And and child free people are probably
even more in favor of those kinds of policies
like maternity leave, paternity leave, uh, free lunches in
school, whatever, to really. Take care of uh children
who are actually born into this world.
Yeah, despite the stereotype, people who don't raise children
of their own really do care about the kids
who are already here and many from my interviews
back to the late 90s, many are in occupations
that help families, help kids, whether it be schools
or A whole number of things. They have kids
in their lives professionally, personally, we're aunties, we're, we're
godmothers, you know, we partake, we find our way
to participate in, uh, the development of the next
generation. If, if we want, and, you know, honestly,
from what I see thousands over, over 25 years,
most people who aren't raising kids on their own,
they do participate in children's lives in some way,
some form. We care about, you know, how they
live in our society, so.
Yeah, so Laura, look, we've already done an hour
and I think we've covered the most important aspects
of being child-free and years. So I mean there
were other things that we could probably talk about,
but let's leave it there. And where can people
find you and your work on the internet?
Well, I have a website, LauraCarroll.com, and I'm on
just about all the socials, um, on Facebook and
Instagram, uh, I post mostly on Blue Sky these
days. I, I'm, I'm not as active on X
anymore for reasons we can all, we all maybe
know about, but, uh, on
all reasons probably also tied to a certain specific
person, also a
person who is a pro-natalist. So, yeah, if you
go to my website, you can have links to
all those socials as well as information about my
books, and also on my site, um, there's a
child-free writings library, I call it now, but it
really is a, it's all of my writings from
when I had a pretty popular blog, La Vie
Child Free, that I started in 2009, and then
over the years, I, I just put everything on.
To LauraCarroll.com. So I, I continue to feed that
library, but you'll find, you know, you'll find writings
going back about topics we talked about today. Certainly,
I have a whole set of them. I'm like,
OK, let's talk about the happiness studies and what's
wrong with them, you know. So you'll see some
historical conversations that have been out there about the
child-free people and uh any, a lot of things
that are related to that, and pro-natalism as well.
OK, so look, thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
very fun to talk with you.
Yeah, you too, Ricardo. I enjoyed it a lot.
Thanks a bunch.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.